MISSION, VALUES & 
BHAG 2020

MISSION STATEMENT
Empowering providers to focus on patient care by removing the burden of Billing and educating around best RCM practices. 
Read the mission statement twice.
Make it clear that we will start each meeting reciting this and our core values.
Explain how this is meant to function as a filter through which we direct all our activity. 

MISSION STATEMENT
How Do We All Support This?

Billers - You have the unique honor of removing the most stressful part of a clinicians work load from their mind.  When done right, clinicians can go home with peace of mind that their claims are being processed for payment without their assistance. 

Set-up - Your attention to detail and care for practice specifics allows for the Billers to excel in successfully removing the Billing burden from the minds of all providers.  


 
Billers have the most obvious function here, but very valuable
Credentialers allow us to even have insurance as an option and get Billers started
Set-up - Everyone that has worked here for more than 30 days knows how important the set-up team is in ensuring everything is ready to begin billing.  When set-up goes smoothly, Billing can hit the ground running.

MISSION STATEMENT
How Do We All Support This?

Sales - You introduce providers to the door to freedom: outsourcing!  You get the privilege of helping providers focus on what they do best by showing them that they can!

Accounting - While accounting does not have a lot of direct contact with providers, outsourcing would not even be an option for providers without the critical function of invoicing.  You keep the boat floating!

R & D - You have the unique opportunity of ensuring that the provider experience is excellent.  You get to help ensure providers that outsourcing was the right option so they NEVER look back! 



 
Sales opens the door to clinicians even knowing that an option like this exists which is a really privileged position. 
Accounting
R&D - has the opportunity to look at how everything is moving together and say, can we make this even easier for providers. 

MISSION STATEMENT
Whenever you’re at a crossroads of activity, ask yourself, “is what I’m doing now helping to empower our providers to focus on patient care?”  The answer will become more obvious!

We all play vital roles in supporting this mission and we exist because providers need support.  We will win at our mission only if we all strive to support it together. 

 

CORE VALUES
Relationship Building
Transparency and Education
Problem Solving
Claim Resolution
EHR Experts
Leave Practices Better Than We Find Them
I spent time thinking through what we are already doing and I made a list of what came out as our core values. 

These might change from year to year, but we want to lean on these as a filter just like the mission statement. 

CORE VALUES
Practice Champions
Black Magic Haters
Option Generators
Denial Vanquisher
EHR Gurus
Legacy Builders

B.H.A.G.
Big Hairy Audacious Goal

2023 Discussion: 

Strengths to Leverage
Our Team and it’s Collective Knowledge
Empowering Providers to Focus
Education (Content)
Hedgehoged, Niched, Canabalizing the Culture, united, clear processes, safety, Uniformity

Strengths to Develop
IT/Coder
EHR/CRM Development
Website Help
Equipment Management
Tech Infrastructure
Service Expansion
Employee Development
Continued Culture Building
Process Change Management
Interdepartmental Communication
What am I doing
Who do I need help from
Who does it affect?
Action Items Post Meeting
Collective Not Taking
Target Market
Use Brand Sprint

What is Inspiring?
Revenue
Client Retention
Be a “House Name.” Notoriety.  Renown.
Be Coveted Place to Work

What does it mean to be a Coveted Place to Work?
Have a Career Path
Increase Base Salary
Continued Education for Employees (Internal/External)
    Billing/Coding Certification → Can be used to do CPU for providers
Dealing Only with Ideal Clients (?)
Increase PTO (4 Weeks)
Sabbatical
Better Maternity Leave
Short Term Disability
Seasonal Eligibility Help
Small Discretionary Fund for Leaders (Clients and Employees)
401k Match
Life Insurance
Fully Paid Health Insurance
Student Loan Payoff
Equipment Upgrades
Standard Company Swag
Subscriptions/Stipend (Spotify, Gym)
EAP
Funded HSA
More Inspiring End of Year Bonuses
Destination Company Party



