What is Professional Services?
A New Way to Serve Our Customers

Value Proposition
Ensure maximization of revenue
Reduce administrative cost
Understand the underlying cause of pain points in billing
Identify unknown areas of concern
Measure the success of their practice year-over-year
Implement pre-developed processes in their practice under the guidance of an expert
A revenue cycle management expert reviewing and providing guidance on billing and administrative processes
In conjunction with our mission to empower providers to focus on patient care by removing the burden of billing and educating on revenue cycle management practices, we have developed a service that allows a practice to utilize our knowledge and expertise in-house to have well-functioning billing and administrative departments. 

We ensure maximization of revenue by investigating their current processes and identifying areas for improvement. Then, we are able to offer products that will address areas of concern.
We help the practice to reduce administrative cost by streamlining processes. In some cases, the practice can reduce costs by bringing billing in-house.
We use described symptoms to help them understand the cause of any pain points through investigation.
We shine a light in all areas of revenue cycle management so that no stone is left unturned. We may even find problems that they practice hasn’t yet felt. 
The services we provide are meant to measure improvement, pushing the practice to optimization.
We are able to help practices implement processes that have already been developed, saving them time and money by not having to reinvent the wheel. We are able to adapt these processes to the practice’s needs.

How do we provide value?
Practice Health Checks
A thorough investigation of the practice consisting of interviews with management and billing and administrative staff, observation of existing processes, and review of their billing and administrative systems. 
Based on our findings, the provider is given an overall score for their practice health, and a list of recommendations they can implement to improve their practice.
Practice Health Checks can be performed regularly to measure improvement.
Implementation Projects
Following a Practice Health Check, the provider can review our recommendations and choose to purchase implementation categories that address any findings. 
Under the guidance and consultation of a PWE, they can fold our existing products into their practice to achieve billing excellence.
Ideally, implementation projects set the practice up with lasting systems for improvement that can be measured by Practice Health Checks.
Professional Services is comprised of two different components: Practice Health Checks and Implementation Projects. 

Practice Health Checks are the investigative phase that concludes with a Practice health score, and a detailed list of our findings and recommendations.It is similar to an audit of the practice, focused on RCM.
Interview: Conduct interviews with management and billing and administrative staff to understand how the practice is currently functioning, and any discrepancies between the departments.
Observe: Watch staff members perform various functions to understand how they currently perform billing and administrative tasks.
Review: Independently access systems, review documents, processes, or anything else the practice can provide to help you understand their current functionality.
Timeline: A few hours up to several days. Averaging two days for investigation.

Implementation is the practical application portion of professional services, and is closer to consulting. It involves training, process creation, documents, and consultation sessions that will ultimately get the practice to optimal performance based on the findings in the Practice Health Check.
Training: Educate management, and billing and administrative staff on revenue cycle management best practices as outlined in the Professional Services products. 
Process Creations: Customize processes as outlined in the Professional Services products to accomplish billing and administrative tasks. These processes should be easily followed and repeatable.
Documents: Utilize documents developed for Professional Services, customizing them to the practice when necessary, and otherwise educating on how to use the tools and incorporating them into the practice’s processes.
Consultation: Providing guidance to the provider based on their objectives and revenue cycle management best practices.
Timeline: Varies depending on the project. It may be weeks, it may be months. 

Who is This Service For?

Professional Services
While this service would benefit every practice, this service particularly helps practices: 
Managing over $1M in Revenue.
Patient Registration
More Complex Billing Requirements
Transitioning to an In-House Biller. 
Fighting a Large Insurance Aging Project.

Managing over $1M in Revenue.
Patient Registration - Patient Registration process requirements need to be clearer and more robust to manage the volume of patients.  Especially if the practice is non-MH because that means that most of their patient appointments are not for recurrent patients.  The Patient Registration volume for Non-MH customers is MUCH greater than what we see in MH.  That means that things can fall apart before the patient is ever seen, very easily.   Information is not collected comprehensively or accurately, information is not transcribed properly, E&B checks are not completed timely or accurately. 
More complex Billing Requirements - In practices managing over $1M, we see more complex billing issues.  Multiple payers, multiple locations, supervision, credentialing issues that are unaddressed, etc. 

We can identify large sweeping issues and address them at large.  The value proposition for smaller accounts is just not as large.  We would still be able to improve efficiency, but the revenue recovery wouldn’t be there. 


Transitioning to an In House Biller of Unhappy with their Current Biller/Admin
We can get SOPs installed and set up their Billing department for success. 

Fighting a Large Insurance Aging Project
This is probably self-explanatory, but we can bring strategy, processes, and results to aging projects. 


I want to note that I didn’t mention that they are Mental Health related.  I actually question if MH is where we should target due to the low reimbursement.  The value proposition to a practice whose revenue recovery is greater than the cost for our services is a much easier sell and more satisfying for all parties involved.

Why Does this Service Exist?

Practice Health Checks
We need to know how the practice is currently functioning at face value before we can address concerns. 
We can prioritize if we know where the biggest problems are. 
We can discover discrepancies between what the practice owner thinks they need to fix their issues and what is true. 
We can get to results faster. 
We can prove our value to the provider.

Implementation
To EDUCATE their staff on how things should function.
To EQUIP practices to implement SOPs that contain best practices for running successful RCM in private practice. 
To PROVIDE tools that enable all of their process to run with ease. 
To ASSIST with strategy and in addressing issues as they are adjusting to better systems.
To RECOVER aging revenue and REDUCE costs due to inefficiency.
Educate - Through trainings
Equip - Through Process Creations
Provide - Through documents.  Visibility through KPI Dashboards. 
Assist - Through consultation
Recover & Reduce - THE RESULT

Billing and Administrative Domains

Billing and Administrative Domains
Administrative
Billing
Credentialing: All processes related to becoming an in-network provider, interpreting and storing contract information, and organizing the information for billing purposes.
Human Resources: All processes related to hiring, training, reviewing performance and firing of billing and administrative staff.
Patient Registration: All processes related to patient intake resulting in collection of all necessary information for billing. 
Eligibility and Benefits: All processes related to verifying eligibility and checking benefits for a patient to obtain relevant billing information.
Payment Posting: All processes related to posting payments for claims including logging denials.
Aging Follow-Up: All processes related to managing follow-up for both insurance and patient aging balances, including denial resolution. 
Claim Submission: All processes related to claim submission including rejection resolution.

Professional Services Workflow

This diagram represents the ideal cycle for Professional Services clients. 

Potential clients would start in sales for a PHC. Currently, the only way we would offer an implementation project without doing a PHC would be if the client is a current insurance billing client.
Sales will establish the PHC type; either a ful PHC, or an abbreviated PHC (investigation of up to 3 out of 7 domains).

Once a PHC contract is established, they would be connected with a PWE who would begin putting together a PHC plan. According to the established plan, the PWE would complete interviews, observations, and independent review for all contracted domains. Then, information is compiled into a PHC Transparency Report and Summary Presentation, which would be presented to the practice in a meeting. 

At this point, the client could take 3 paths: 1) They can use the information in the PHC Transparency report to improve their practice internally, returning to PHC Sales to schedule a follow-up PHC between 6 months to 1 year after the original PHC. 2) They can move to Implementation Sales, where the PWE can work with sales to curate the best package of product recommendations to address findings in the PHC. 3) The client can use the PHC transparency report and decide not to schedule another PHC. Option 3 is the least favorable, unless they have completed enough PHCs to see stable and fully optimized processes. 

From Implementation Sales, if the project is lost the client would either end their customer journey with us, or ideally move back to PHC sales to schedule a follow-up PHC. If the project is won, they would continue working with a PWE to develop a fulfilment schedule for the selected products. Then the PWE would work to customize all products to the practice, ultimately delivering all products according to the schedule to project completion. From there, the client would return to PHC sales to schedule a follow-up PHC to ensure that the implementation project results are effective. 

A collaboration for Practice Success
We want to equip practices with the best Revenue Cycle Management practices through investigation, objective evaluation, and implementation.
